1  
  Democratic Decentralization and Empowerment of Women: (With  
Special Reference to Oraon Tribes of Mandar Block Ranchi District)           
A Sociological Analysis  
  
  
  
 
SYNOPSIS  
FOR Ph.D.   
AT UNIVERSITY DEPARTMENT OF SOCIOLOGY  
(FACULTY OF SOCIAL SCIENCES)   
RANCHI UNIVERSITY, RANCHI  
2023   
  
  
    
 Research Supervisor   Researcher   
  
 (Dr. Prabhat Kumar Singh)  (Aboobacker Siddique P) 
  
 Associate Professor,  University Department of Sociology,  
  
 University  Department of Sociology,                                               Ranchi University, Ranchi                                        
Ranchi University, Ranchi  

2  
  Democratic Decentralization and Empowerment of Women: (With  
Special Reference to Oraon Tribe s of Mandar Block Ranchi District) A 
Sociological Analysis  
Introduction  
        Empowerment, Democ ratic Decentralization, People’s participation etc are some of             
the critical concepts in the contemporary discourse on development , particular ly in the 
context of gender. Issue of women’s subordination and their invisibility in public life 
especially in the decision -making bodies are very often considered as a major obstacle for 
development with social equality and justice  to all.  In India with the introduction of 
constitutional amendment, assured participation of women in panchayats and with various 
initiatives taken by the Government the quantum of representation and participation of 
women in local political bodies have gone up howev er how far this participation actually 
contributed to the empowerment of women in general and women of marginalised 
communities like SCs/STs in particular is still a concern for academics and policy makers. 
The proposed study titled “ Democratic Decentraliz ation and Empowerment of Women: 
(With special Reference to Oraon Tribes of Mandar Block Ranchi District) A Sociological 
Analysis”  is mainly an attempt to understand the impact of democratic decentralisation and 
assured representation of women in local deci sion-making bodies  vis a vis their 
empowerment and community development. The study is proposed to be conducted in a 
selected panchayat dominantly inhabited by the Oraon community in the Mander block of 
Ranchi district, Jharkhand.      
 India is  the larges t democracy in the world with a rich democratic heritage . The idea of 
local self -government and to an extent d emocratic decentralization has existed in Indian 
society for many centuries. The present form of democratic decentralization evolved after 
indepen dence over a period through a series administrative reform. The three -tier system 
3  
  of Panchayati Raj became a constitutional mandate after the 73rd constitutional amendment 
in 1992 -93. However even after three decades of democratic decentralization and 
functioning of local self -government institutions, its impacts upon various communities, 
gender, caste, class, and regions in India is a debatable for  researchers, academics, policy 
makers and others in general.   
     The main purpose of democracy is to ensur e effective participation of people in the 
decision -making process and to ensure their welfare and the progress. After Independence, 
with adoption of Universal Adult Franchise which is a fundamental feature of 
Constitutional Democracy equal participation o f all sections of society was expected in the 
decision -making process. However active participation of under privileged sections of 
society like scheduled castes, scheduled tribes, minorities and particularly of women has 
been an area of concern both in te rms of quantum (number) and quality across democratic 
institutions and political parties/forums in India. The socio demographic analysis of the 
limited number of women who got elected at various levels of Indian political system at 
both legislative and par ty forums show visible discrimination towards the women from 
lower sections of society.   
     Democracy is not merely an administrative mechanism. It is a value, which encompass 
freedom, equality, and justice to everybody irrespective of caste, class and gender. In a 
country like India with its stupendous diversity and plurality, democracy can be successful 
only through the assured participation of the people from different sections of the society. 
The core idea of democracy is the belief that every person  within the community is equally 
entitled to a life of dignity, self -respect, and wellbeing. People's participation is very much 
central to democracy, whether it be direct or indirect. Hence the question of empowerment 
is vitally connected to democratic po lity.  
4  
       Politics is not the only route to women's emancipation but indeed a significant one, which 
reflects the power relations existing in a society and manifests through decision  making 
process. Hence it affects directly resource distribution, its ut ilization and wellbeing of any 
society. Direct participation of people makes a democracy successful. But mere 
participation, let say physical presence would not bring about desired changes and progress 
in a society. Participation with self -realization and awareness is much more important. That 
is, an empowered participation is required for a better democracy. Empowerment in its 
broader sense is about creating knowledge, capacity building, realization of rights and 
capacity to demand and protest. In a more s pecific sense, the reference is to the assured 
representation and participation to the deprived groups in day -to day governance. In such 
a democracy the government would be more responsive to the needs of the people, or it 
would be accessible to them. The more democracy comes closer to the people the more 
democratic it becomes. So, the issue of empowerment is germane to democracy.   
Decentralization, people’s participation, and empowerment are some of the new 
catchwords in the contemporary discourse on development, especially in the Third World  
countries.  These are widely acknowledged as an instrument  to achieve equality and social 
justice. While the latter goals have been widely endorsed for quite some time, but their 
realization remain lar gely unfulfilled. Therefore, the instrumentalities have been invoked 
in recent times .  In India democratic decentralization became important after independence 
from the point of view of twin objects of democracy and development. The same is 
reflected in In dian constitution as well. Article 40 of Indian constitution directs the 
government of India to organize village panchayats and endow them with powers of self -
government to cope with this problem. Appointment of Balwant Rai Mehta study team in 
1957 to cons ider the institutional framework and suggest measures for mobilizing local 
resources was the first step taken in this direction. The Committee reported in 1958, that 
Community Development Programme launched in 1952 failed to get expected public co -
5  
  operatio n. As a solution, Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIS) as an institutional form of 
democratic decentralization with three tiers -at District, Block, and Panchayat -- were 
suggested. In conformity to this many states enacted Panchayat Raj Acts. But a unified 
form of Panchayati Raj Institutions with statutory powers, first time in the history of India 
came into being with 73rd and 7 4th amendments of Indian constitution in 1992 -93.   
    From the perspective of women's empowerment, 73rd and 74th Amendment Act of Indian 
constitution is quite radical of its kind. It ensures one -third reservation for women in all 
the three tiers of local bodies including the post of presidents.  As a natu ral sequence of 
73rd amendment, the number /physical participation of women across the s tate  has gone 
up in local bodies and in public life in general, however the quality of participation like 
freedom in taking independent decisions, freedom to attend in  meetings /active public life, 
participation in deliberations, financial responsibilities, ability to influence the fund 
allocations, utilization etc. have been still a matter of concern.   
     After introduction of 73rd & 74th constitutional amendments m ost of the states in India came 
up with their own version of Panchayati Raj Acts and conducted elections resulting large 
number of women getting elected to Panchayati Raj Institutions.   
Jharkhand also passed its Act in 2001, however due to litigations and  other reason the first 
elections to the newly formed PRIs in the state could be conducted in 2010. In 2010 
election in all three levels of panchayats total 51,285 representatives were elected to the 
53207 seats. A total of 29,415 women were got elected co nstituting 57.56% of the total 
seats. Total 2353 posts of Mukhiyas and 2435 seats in panchayat Samitis were held by 
Women. In 2015 elections too large number of women across the spectrum got elected. In 
2015 out of total 64700 seats 34019, i.e., 52.18% wer e reserved for women, in which 11113 
seats were reserved for women from ST community. A Total of 30757 women 
representatives and 2420 women chairpersons were got elected. In addition to reserved 
6  
  seats few women got elected from general seats too taking wom en’s representation even 
higher.   
From above discussion it’s clear that with the introduction of mandatory reservation of 
women in panchayats the number of women in Local Self Government Institutions has 
gone up considerably. With 50% reservation of seats  to women in Jharkhand also large 
number of women were got elected to local government bodies. The provision of 
mandatory quorum of one third women in Gram Sabha also introduced in the state as a 
progressive and effective tool to ensure participation of wo men grassroot democracy. 
Although statutory provisions ensured the quantum of participation of women the actual 
quality of women’s participation and how far it helped in empowering women is an area 
of concern, needs to be studied in detail.  This study wil l try to analyze the reservation of 
women in Local Self Government Institutions from the perspective of quality of 
participation and its impact on women’s empowerment, actual role of tribal women in 
decision making process, role of information technology i n promoting women’s 
participation, the impact of democratic decentralization and the improved participation in 
the day today life of women and in empowering them as equal partners in resource 
allocation/control as well as in development.   
State of the Art  (Literature  Review)  
The concept of decentralization , participation, and empowerment are widely discussed in 
various literatures by various social scientists as a  tool to achieve equality and social 
justice.  These concepts are not mutually exclusive, but v itally interlinked. There is no 
universally accepted definition of the concept of decentralization. The liberal 
interventionists consider decentralization as an effective means to make governments more 
effective in development and administration. In this v iew administrative decentralization 
is much more important than democratic decentralization or political decentralization. It is 
7  
  more about organization of government to increase efficiency and reduce delays. Here the 
role of people is very limited and con fined to political participation in terms of voting. 
According to liberal interventionists such a governmental organization will promote the 
process of local resource mobilization, democracy and better co -ordination and integration 
of developmental activit ies. For liberal interventionists decentralization is more technical, 
a policy matter and constitutional. They believe that effecti ve decentralization will promote 
economic growth, hence, more welfare and development, which in -turn will reduce 
inequalities . For them people's participation is a strategy for quick and successful 
implementation of development programmes. Citizens are beneficiaries rather than 
planners or managers. For them popular empowerment is desirable but not a major concern.  
     The rad ical populist view is primarily concerned with political decentralization, more 
precisely democratic decentralization. This approach to development is 'bottom to top'. For 
them the central concern is mass empowerment. 'People first’ is their slogan. Accord ing to 
this perspective development is not merely economic growth, but growth with equity. 
Hence, decentralization is considered as "democratic redistribution of political power to 
the grassroots”.  For radical populists’ decentralization is not simply a m eans but also a 
goal. It ensures mass mobilization for democratization at the grassroots through various 
strategies of political empowerment of the weak.  
Despite these two differing streams of thought what we have seen in general in different 
places where  decentralization is being introduced, is a mixture of ideas drawn arbitrarily 
from these two schools of thought. In India democratic decentralization and local 
government institutions are not new ideas, we had the Gandhian notion of 'Gramswaraj' 
during th e freedom stru ggle itself. The same got reflected in our constitution also. That is 
in the popular consciousness decentralization is a public policy of the central government 
aiming to speed up development by meeting local needs more quickly through politi cally 
8  
  empowered local governments. It makes administration efficient, accountable, responsive 
and brings government closer to the people. It improves the link between demand and 
meeting of people’s need and facilitates better mobilization of local resource s.   
Most of the literature on decentralization and Local Self Government Institutions (LSGIS) 
are primarily based on the liberal normative assumptions. Based on that there are three types 
of decentralization. These are delegation, de -concentration, and de volution. According to 
United Nation's Development Programme's (UNDP) report on Human Development 1993, 
decentralization means passing down of limited administrative discretions to local offices 
of central government ministries. Delegation involves passing  down of some authority and 
decision -making powers to local offices. But central government retains its right to change 
the decisions taken by local governments and can even take awa y their powers at any time. 
Devolution, the strongest among these, means g ranting decision -making powers to local 
authorities and allowing them to take full responsibility without referring to central 
government. This includes financial powers as well as the authority to design and execute 
local development projects and programm es.   
Our understanding of decentralization does not totally conform to any of these models and 
yet not totally different from them. The democratic decentralization that we are talking 
about is a process initiated in India immediately after independence an d legalized through 
the 73rd amendment of Indian Constitution in 1993. It is a form of devolution coupled with 
democracy. Decentralization may not be necessarily democratic. The prefix democratic not 
only gives a special meaning to it but also distinguishe s it from other forms of 
decentralization, bringing the element of empowerment to it. So democratic 
decentralization is an extension of the democratic principles of people's right to manage 
their own affairs in a local area without any undue interference f rom regional or national 
authorities.  It makes democracy meaningful by ensuring people's participation in the day -
9  
  to-day governance. Democratic decentralization thus establishes grassroot democracy. That 
is "democratic decentralization” is a political ide al and local self -government is its 
institutional form. It is democratic in the sense; power is decentralized from a democratic 
source as well as power is devolved to a democratically organized body.  
There is nothing new in saying that people's participation is inherent to democratic 
decentralization. It is not simply a desirable pre -requisite for democracy, but also a 
necessary condition. According to J.S. Mill , "The only government which can fully sa tisfy 
all the exigencies of the social state is one in which the whole people participate". The more 
people participate the more democracy becomes meaningful; and it comes closer to the 
people. People's participation gives legitimacy to the system. Partici pation is the essence of 
liberty and freedom. It is not a simple question of presence, but an opportunity, by which 
people can control, influence, and share the policies and resources of the country. The 
question of popular participation is not only signif icant for a successful democracy. 
According to liberal interventionist school of thought, the term participation means 
collaboration of people of all strata in planning and execution of development activities on 
the local levels. It is viewed as a strategy  for rapid implementation of development projects. 
Universal franchise is enough for them to claim political participation. They see 
participation as an inclusion of human resources or as an input to development projects. For 
radical populist school, parti cipation is a process whereby poor people seek to have some 
influence and gain access to the resources, which would help them to sustain and improve 
their living standards. They focus on power relation and argue that genuine participation 
involves structur al changes and empowerment. It strives to enable the poor people to decide 
upon and to take the actions which they believe as essential to their development. People's 
participation is, therefore, a major movement for political empowerment of the poor and 
other underprivileged sections of the grassroots. It enables them to function influentially in 
the process of local level planning and execution. Hence, the political participation is 
10  
  viewed as a process whereby poor people gain access to local resources, i mprove their 
standard of living, and exert political power through local governance so for national 
development.  
The word empowerment got much currency in the recent developmental debate. It is 
because feminists, human right champions and other social act ivists have been invoking 
this idea in their pursuit of freedom and justice. It is not only because of its strong appeal 
for change, but also because of its capacity to challenge the existing socio - political, 
economic, and cultural subordinations of weake r sections in a society. These subordinations 
are often rooted in the prevailing social and power structure, gender relations, culture, and 
ideology. Now the old formulation of growth with social justice has been reformulated as 
development with empowermen t. Empowerment to put it simply implies giving power to a 
certain underprivileged section of the society.  This view of empowerment is very much 
consistent with the dictionary meaning of the term, that is, to give someone the official or 
legal authority or  the freedom to do something.  
Etymologically the word empowerment is rooted in the concept of power. Power is central 
to any understanding of empowerment. That is, any notion of empowerment cannot be 
separated from the idea of power. As Beteille observes,  although the concept of power in it 
(empowerment) is generally left unspecified, ultimately it is all about power. Power is a 
universal phenomenon in human societies; it is inherent in all kinds of social relations. That 
is power is not simply political, it is very much social also. Broadly referred, political 
power --legal, administrative, military, economic --is only one of several and various kind of 
powers.    
Power in sociology is not a consensually defined concept. It has diverse meanings and 
connotati ons. As pointed out by R. Bierstedt : "In the entire lexicon of sociological concept, 
none is more troublesome than the concept of power ". According to Lewis Coser , there are 
11  
  two major traditions in the conceptualization of power. First, "power may be seen as the 
imposition of the will of actor A (who may be either an individual or a collectivity) upon 
actor B, even against B's resistance: so that B is dominated by A". Secondly, "power may 
be conceptualized as a resource at the disposal of collectivities and used for their benefits, 
allowing them to attain their objectivities". First explanation is basically that of Weber's 
who defined power as follows: "in general, we understand by power, the chance of a man 
or a number of men to realize their own will in a social action even against the resistance of 
others, who are participating in the action." Here power is based on the notion of domination 
and subordination or ac tion and resistance. In its very nature power is asymmetrical and 
represent the 'power over' view of power. According to this understanding of power, one 
party can enhance its power only by reducing the power of others. So, empowerment of 
some sections of society must be accompanied by disempowerment of the other.  
In India there are many studies available on various aspects of democratic decentralisation, 
political participation and  empowerment of women with special focus on  different states on 
quantum of participation of women in general but very few or negligible on Jharkhand,  its 
women and Oraon a prominent tribal group in the state. Some of the important studies are 
reviewed and summarised below.  
Review of the Existing Literature    
     Tyagi Am arendra (2002)  “Dalit and Tribal Leadership in Panchayats” analyses Dalit and 
tribal leadership in Local Self Government Institutions after the implementation of 73rd 
constitutional amendment. Socio economic profile of Dalit leaders in panchayat, their 
participation, obstacles, provisions of Panchayats (Extension to the scheduled Areas) Act 
1996, Implication of Panchayat Laws in scheduled Areas of Jharkhand, Tribal Women in 
local governance with special reference to Andhra Pradesh etc.  In the Jharkhand stu dy an 
attempt has been made to evaluate Jharkhand PESA 1996, about the empowerment of the 
12  
  Gram Sabha and how it’s being helpful for their socio -political upliftment, implication of 
traditional governance system etc.   
     Baviskar BS & Mathew George ed. ( 2009)  “Inclusion and Exclusion in Local Governance, 
Field Studies from Rural India” is a compilation experiences across different states. It 
reveals the nature of working of democratic decentralization in Indian villages of 12 major 
states. Issues regardin g empowerment, discrimination against women, scheduled castes 
and scheduled tribes also have been dealt with. Experiences varies across the states, caste, 
gender, and communities. It also depends on the socio -economic factors, state policies etc. 
Various a rticles also studied power dynamics, issues of empowerment, changing power 
relations with special reference to women and other marginalized sections of society. 
Though the book studied 12 major states no reference to Bihar and Jharkhand in specific.   
     Meenakshi J (2012)  “Women and Panchayati Raj” presents a pan India view on women in 
panchayat raj system. The book is a compilation of outcome and discussion of a 
participatory appraisal. Authors argues that the constitutional amendment providing one 
third representation to women in elected bodies as well as reserving one third of the offices 
of chairpersons for them will have far reaching consequences in Indian political and social 
life. In a traditional society of our democracy can’t be meaningful withou t full involvement 
of women.   
     Hasan Zoya & Menon Ritu ed. (2005)  “In a Minority, Essays on Muslim Women in India”, 
this edited work based on empirical studies presents the diversity of Muslim women’s lives 
in all its complexity. Various chapters disc ussing the material and social circumstances in 
shaping the lives of Muslim women. Among other socio economic and cultural issues there 
are chapters on participation of Muslim women in electoral politics, panchayat raj and 
leadership as well. The chapter o n Panchayati Raj and women in Kerala also discusses 
theoretical aspects of decentralization, devolution, and empowerment.    
13  
       Kathyayan Rashmi (2013)  “Jharkhand Panchayati Raj Handbook”. The book is a collection 
of different Acts and rules pertaining t o panchayat with special focus to state Acts, rules. 
It also has information on supreme court judgement on PESA, constitutional provisions on 
scheduled areas, traditional system of governance, power, functions, and responsibilities 
various institutions inc luding Gram Sabha.   
     Palanithurai G ed. (2004)  “Dynamics of Panchayati Raj System in India”, the multi volume 
work examines the various aspect of political decentralization in India. Volume IV 
specifically deals with the question of empowerment. Experiences from different states 
like Andhra Pradesh, K arnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nādu etc. have been compiled and 
analysed .  The volume addresses wide range of issues concerning women empowerment 
in planning, finance, people’s participation, resource management, capacity building, 
leadership, and challenges etc.  The article on ‘Role of women in Decentralization ’ argues 
that women’s experience of local government cannot be used merely in a limited gender 
focused manner to enhance the participation of women and to improve women’s 
contribution to the panchayat’s ach ievement. The Volume also carries article on 
experiences from Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala with special focus on 
decentralization and empowerment. It also examines the role of grass root institutions in 
addressing various issues related to women.   
     Singh MK (2014)  “Panchayati Raj System in India, Issues and Challenges” Panchayati raj 
institutions are considered as the vehicle of socio -economic transformation of rural India. 
The sizable presence of women and other underprivileged sections of rural populace in the 
local self -government institutions is a landmark development in the political history of the 
country. The 73rd constitutional amendment and the subsequent elections in different states 
geared this change, though the quality of participation  is debatable. The book examines the 
various aspects like women’s awareness on Panchayati Raj Institutions, historical 
14  
  evolution, development and management of Panchayati Raj Institutions, role of women in 
local governance vis -vis rural development.  
     Mathew Abraham (2005)  “Role of Panchayats in Welfare Administration” apart from the 
theoretical discussion on welfare administration the study examines the role of local self -
government institution in ensuring public welfare at the grass roots. The study a lso 
highlights the importance of 73rd constitutional amendment in ensuring democratic 
decentralization and participation of women and other marginalized sections of society.   
     Mathew George ed for ISS (2013) , examines the status of Panchayati raj inst itutions across 
the states in the country. This report compiled for institute of social science New Delhi has 
an in -depth analysis of the working of Panchayati Raj Institutions in the country. The 
chapter on Jharkhand gives a clear view on system of local governance starting from 
traditional self -governance system to modern Panchayati Raj Institutions. The chapter not 
only analyses the historical evolution of panchayats in the state but also attempted to 
contextualize the same in the contexts of traditional  tribal village administrative system 
and tenancy laws. The article also discusses the administrative structure of 3 tier 
panchayats, elections, devolution of power, training and capacity building etc.   
     Seth Sachi (2016)  “PRI Elections in Jharkhand: Making Women Count” analyses the post -
election scenario in Jharkhand with supporting stories/experiences from elected women 
representatives. Though the Panchayati Raj Institutions and election under the new act is 
relatively new in Jharkhand there was a su rge in political participation of women and 56% 
seats were won by women. Despite many success stories the author argues that though the 
representation of women gone up beyond reservation when it comes to decision making 
often decisions are taken behest mal e politician or husbands. The paper concludes with an 
observation that Panchayati Raj elections are a step towards better engagement with the 
state so that the rural people can fight for their right sand take their problems to the state 
15  
  through their repre sentatives. What is necessary to make this process successful in its 
objective of strengthening rural populations is the involvement of all communities and 
strata of society.  
     Vidyarthi LP & Rai Ninay Kumar (1976)  “The Tribal culture Of India” is a detailed 
anthropological study of tribal society -social organization, political, religious, and cultural 
life. For understanding political participation of tribal community, it is very important to 
understand the traditi onal social organization and political life of tribals. The book argues 
that the political life of the tribals of India reflects a paradoxical situation in which 
democracy and monarchy coexists. Clan, hereditary, lineage etc. has   important role in 
commun ity leadership. The tribal leader governs the community only because he is backed 
by the majority or the whole of the group. The Munda’s of Chota Nagpur elect their head. 
The political characteristic of tribals broadly be looked through their social organi zation. 
They are based on clan lineage, a unit village, and a group of villages within a territory. 
Different tribal groups have different traditions, nature, customs which governs the 
political life. Among the Mundas, Oraons, Hos and Kharias the panchayat h consists of the 
influential and elderly persons of the village including non -tribal members living in the 
area. With the advent of statutory village panchayats sponsored by government in many 
areas both statutory panchayats and traditional panchayats sta rted working in parallel.    
     Oraon Prakash Chandra (2003)  “Land and people of Jharkhand” is a comprehensive 
account of Jharkhand the newly born state its land people. The book has an exhaustive 
collection of socio -political life various tribal communi ties living in Jharkhand. The 
chapter on Oraons analyses the culture, social structure and institutions like family, 
religion, marriage, kinship, economy, political organizations etc. The Oraons have 
traditional political organization like village panchaya t and inter village panchayat called 
16  
  Parha Panchayat. It also discusses the roles and responsibilities panchayat, dispute 
redressal mechanism etc.   
     Singh Sunil Kumar (2012)  “Inside Jharkhand” is a comprehensive depiction of Jharkhand, 
its history, ge ography, minerals, industry, development, administrative structure etc. The 
book provides detailed information and data on various aspects including socio -
demographic profile of each district. It also provides basic information about the   family 
and socia l organization of different tribal communities. The chapter on administrative 
system of Jharkhand also discusses the evolution of Panchayati raj institutions in the state.   
     EPW Engage (2019)  “Where are the women in Indian Politics” analyses the agenc y of 
women in bringing changes in the political space of India. Though the voting turnout of 
women has gone up considerably over the years the article poses the larger question that 
an increase in number necessarily indicate more meaningful political parti cipation? The 
article argues that “To understand that women, as a category, cannot be treated as 
uniform —especially as a political category. Caste, class, and demographic differences 
need to be accounted for if we wish to understand the nuances of how and why women 
vote because these intersections are instrumental in defining the political aspirations that 
these women may have. Socio -economic differences are also crucial when we try to 
understand how much space a woman can carve for herself in the political  sphere”. The 
article examines 4 major questions in details that are is voting participation affects female 
empowerment, making political decisions -whom to vote, how active the elected women in 
democratic process and how much they can influence in decision  making.  
     Rajunayak Vislavath & Sunitha Bhukya (2021)  “Limits of the Modern Political System: 
The case of an Erukula Woman Sarpanch in Telangana” explain how the social status of 
an elected woman from a tribal community did not change and questions of  limitations of 
modern state power in the form of democratic decentralisation through Panchayati raj act. 
17  
  The paper is ethnographic report on the story of an elected sarpanch from the nomadic 
tribal community called Erukula in Telangana. It analyses the la yers of social oppression 
and the political structure and its inbuilt limitations that affects the working of women in 
panchayats and the resultant empowerment. The author argues that for many, Panchayati 
raj institutions held out the promise of genuine de mocracy and decentralisation. However, 
over the last few decades, the state’s constant attempts to minimise the role of these 
institutions in democratic participation and administrative decision -making has made it 
difficult to hold on to such optimism.  
     Srivatsa P (2016)  “Political empowerment of women and Panchayati Raj” argues that the 
adoption of the 73rd amendment had a great revolutionary potential to create genuine 
democracy at the grassroots level, a historic opportunity to change the face of rural India. 
The amendment mandates that resources, responsibility and decision -making  power be 
devolved from central government to Panchayati Raj Institutions. The author argues that 
empowerment of women in all spheres particularly in political sphere is very crucial for 
their advancement and for foundation gender equal society. Political empowerment of 
women starts with the active participation of women in political institutions.   
     Jephy Medonna (2022)  “Women Empowerment through Panchayati Raj system ” argues 
that though at present women enjoy equal status with men as per the constitution and legal 
provisions but still, they have a long way to go. It is true and proved that “a country 
prospers if its women prosper”. So, women’s empowerment is vital tow ards the 
development of the society. ‘Empowerment’ means ‘to authorize’. In the context of the 
people, they must be authorized to have control over their own lives. Empowerment is an 
only effective answer to oppression, exploitation, injustice, and other m elodies of society. 
In short, Women empowerment means to give women the opportunity to fulfil their 
18  
  creative capabilities and desires and take decisions independently. It has social, political, 
economic, cultural dimensions.  
Sinha Shrishti (2021 ) “Politic al empowerment of women through restructured Panchayati 
Raj institutions” is an in -depth analysis on evolution and functioning of Panchayati Raj 
Institutions  in India.  It concludes that the women’s political empowerment can begin with 
Panchayat i Raj Instit utions  since their confidence and gasp of the polity will e nable them 
to vote in elec tions to state legislatures and parliament, opening the route from “Panchayat 
to Parliament”. They can even get the confidence to take a stand for themselves, but it is 
only the start of a journey toward empowerment. Women’s empowerment requires more 
than local reservations and women’s involvement in Panchayati Raj institutions because 
the mindset that women are meant for households has still not changed, women are still 
not educated. Still, women are oppressed and are denied their rights and they face many 
more hurdles. But the Panchayati Raj Institutions  are great initiatives to make women 
strong either politically, economically, or socially  
Raghunandan T R (2012)  “Decentr alisation  and Local Governments The Indian         
experience” is a compilation of essays published in EPW over different period  of time. The 
edited volume contains 25 essays discussing various facets of local self-government  
institutions in India, its evolution,  its functioning, its impact , experiences from different 
states including women’s role in local governance and deci sion making . Few essays are 
focused on gender perspective and women’s participation in PRIs. The essa y titled “ Women 
in Panchyati Raj” by Vyasulu and Vyasulu analyses the experience of women from Malgudi 
in Karnataka. The essay analysing various factors like gender, caste,  class and religious 
identities and women’s  participation concludes  with caution tha t “PRIs  as grass root s 
democratic governance institutions are a necessity but not sufficient condition in the 
transformation to a better social order”.  There is also a chapter on “Networks of Panchayat 
Women” by Behar and Aiyer on interface of Civil Socie ty Organisation and women in PRIs 
19  
  and its contribution in capacity building,  mobility and empowerment. Another essay by M 
E Jhon titled “Women in Power” discusses various aspects covering gender, caste and 
politics in local governance. The collected works also having various chapters on impact of 
reservation, fiscal decentralisation, women leaders in urban local bodies in Kerala etc 
among others.  
Relevance of the present -day problem and needs of society  
    The issue of women empowerment is many folde d-economic, social, and political. In a 
democracy effective participation of each person is very crucial in terms of health of nation 
as well as welfare of its citizens. Women constitute 50% of the human resources the of 
nation. However, the participation women in various domains of public life like social, 
economic, and political spheres are still not encouraging. The invisibility of women in 
public life in general and in politics always been an area of concern for all. All over the 
country women’s partici pation in Panchayati Raj Institutions have gone up. However 
elected women as an agency of social change, how much they can take up the issues 
pertaining to women - gender discrimination, violence, development deficit, role in 
decision making, invisibility o f women in public life etc. is need thorough analysis across 
the communities. The present study is attempted to understand the impact of democratic 
decentralization upon women empowerment with special focus to Oraon women. The 
outcome of this study certain ly will help policy makers, planners, social activists, and 
researchers to understand the real issues and challenges of tribal women’s participation and 
find out the solutions for the same. Further the positive outcomes may be replicated if 
needed to addre ss the issues of women’s invisibility and subordination.   
         Problem to be investigated  
As it is evident from above discussion hardly any study available on impact of             
democratic  decentralisation  and empowerment of women specific  to Oraon communities of 
20  
  Jharkhand.   Hence this study intent to take up the case of women belonging to Oraon,  one 
of the major tribal communities  in Jharkhand. How far the increased representation of 
women actually contributing to their empowerment and  the development. It also will 
examine the role of various government initiatives and the role information technology in 
transforming the women’s leadership and the quality of their participation in the decision -
making  process, setting agendas and in policy d ecisions concerning their life. The study 
will certain help not only to bridge the existing gap in knowledge but also will contribute 
immensely to understand the issues of tribal women in local governing system and ways to 
improve the quality of their part icipation in the decision -making process. It also will   assist 
the policy makers in  modifying if necessary or intervene further depending upon the 
findings of the study.    
Objective of the Investigation   
     Undoubtedly the representation of women and political participation of women in general 
has gone up considerably after the 73rd constitutional amendment mandating reservation of 
50% seats for women in local government institutions. It ensured the number however its 
impact in terms of empowerment , at the qualitative level is still a major concern. Further 
the benefits of reservation leading to empowerment varies among different communities, 
gender, and class. It also is a function of many other socio -cultural and political factors. 
Major objective s of the present study are:   
1.  To examine the impact of the 73rd constitutional Amendment on women’s 
representation and participation in PRIs in India and its contribution to their 
empowerment  
2. To Evaluate effectiveness of the capacity building initiatives for women’s leadership 
and participation in decentralized gover nment structures in India  
21  
  3. To assess the role of information and communication technology in promoting women’s 
participation in empowerment in decentralized governance structures in India  
4. To explore the extent to which women’s participation in village lev el decision making 
bodies have contributed to the empowerment and development of their communities  
 
Hypothesis   
Mentioned below are the hypotheses proposed to be tested in the proposed study of 
democratic decentralization and the empowerment of women.  
1. The 73rd constitutional amendment lead to increase in women’s representation and 
participation in PRIs , which has contributed to their empowerment  
2. Capacity building initiatives for women’s leadership and participation in decentralized 
government structures have been effective in enhancing their participation and 
promoting their empowerment  
3. Information and communication technology have played a cruci al role in promoting 
women’s participation in decentralized government structures in India  
4. Women’s participation in village level decision making bodies have contributed 
significantly to their empowerment and the development of their communities.  
Research Design and Methodology   
Conducting research on democratic decentralization in tribal women requires a culturally 
sensitive and gender -responsive research methodology that considers the complexities of 
power dynamics and community context. The study would therefore be carried out using 
a specific research methodology that will consider the cultural context, gender dynamics, 
and power structures at play. Here is a general outline of a potential research methodology 
which will be used:  
22  
  Research Design:  The f irst step is to determine the research design that will best suit the 
research question. A descriptive research design with a mix of qualitative and quantitative 
research tools such as nonparticipant observation, structured questionnaire, interview 
with el ected representative etc. may be used in collection of data for this study as it allows 
for an in -depth understanding of the experiences, perspectives, and practices of tribal 
women in democratic decentralization.   
Sampling : Next will be the need to identi fy the population of tribal women who 
participate in democratic decentralization. A purposive sampling method may be used to 
select women who are actively engaged in the democratic process as this would ensure 
that the sample is representative of the popul ation being studied, rather than relying on 
random sampling, which may not necessarily reflect the diversity of experiences among 
tribal women.  The study is proposed to be carried out in Brambe y gram panchayat of 
Mandar block. The panchayat has total 15 w ards in which 13 of them are occupied by 
women elected representatives. The panchayat head and  both members of panchayat 
Samiti is also women. As far as possible experiences of all these women elected 
representatives would be taken. There are 1341 househol ds covering 4712 voters and 
more than 50% are women in the panchayat. Hence 80 -100 women voters will be 
randomly selected as sample to understand the general perspective of women on their 
participation in local politics and empowerment.     
Data Collection : A combination of primary and secondary data would be collected and 
analysed to provide an objective and verifiable evidence to support the hypothesis. 
Primary data collection methods would include collection of data through questionnaire, 
semi -structured  and structured interviews, non -participant observation, and document 
analysis. The use of non -participatory methods such as focus group discussions may be 
particularly useful to encourage open and honest dialogue. Sources of secondary data 
23  
  would include r elevant literature, reports, research papers, online materials pertaining to 
the topic of study.   
Analysis:  Analysis of the obtained data would be conducted using appropriate  software 
or through manual coding of the data. Thematic analysis might be used f or identifying 
patterns and themes in the data.  
Ethics:  Ethical considerations are essential when conducting research with vulnerable 
populations such as tribal women. Informed consent would be obtained, and 
confidentiality and anonymity will be maintaine d throughout the research process.    
   
Area of Study  
    The study would be focusing the impact of functioning Panchayati Raj Institutions among 
Oraon community of Jharkhand. Oraon is an important rather dominant tribal group in 
Jharkhand. They live mainly in Chotanagpur region of Jharkhand. Ranchi is one of  the 
scheduled districts falling in the region. The present study would be concentrating on 
Mandar block which has large concentration tribal communities i.e., 60% of its 
population. Among tribal population Oraon constitute 80 %. Hence Mander is a natural 
choice for study of political participation of women among Oraon in Jharkhand. In 
Mandar block Brambey panchayat is proposed for detailed study and sampling.  Brambey 
panchayat is dominated by Tribal communities with 74 % of tribal population mainly of 
Oraons.   
Significance of the Study  
     The democratic decentralization and the introduction modern Panchayati Raj Institutions 
helped in assuring the participation of women in public life. However, the situation is not 
uniform across the communities and th e region. Though there is a quantum jump in 
24  
  numbers there are many qualitative issues and challenges that women are facing. In 
Jharkhand Panchayat elections are held after much delay in 2010.  The PRI in the modern 
form is relatively new in Jharkhand. Howe ver, data from past two elections shows that 
there is a considerable surge in numbers in terms of women elected representatives. 
However how much this participation is working as a tool for empowerment and social 
change is needs to be studied. There are no t many studies on participation of tribal women 
in panchayats so far with focus on Jharkhand. Oraon are one of the dominant tribal 
communities in Jharkhand has been playing a significant role in the public life of 
Jharkhand. However, the role of Panchayati  Raj Institutions in addressing the larger 
questions of rural development, bridging gender gap, addressing the issues of women 
empowerment etc. are yet to known. This study intent analyses the role of decentralization 
and its impact on women in terms impro ving their social status and empowerment.   
Contribution of the existing knowledge  
     Political empowerment of women is very much critical for the national development and 
to ensure gender equity. Power structure in society is mainly male oriented and w omen 
are often considered the victims. Though the constitutional amendment and statutory 
reservation of women in Local Self Government Institutions certainly helped in 
improving participation of women in local governance and politics. However qualitative 
participation of elected women in the real decision -making process is still a matter of 
concern. Women in panchayats are often controlled by the patriarchal power structure 
both at social and family level. Voices of elected women members are often ignored o r 
neglected. Whether elected women or the improved participation of women translated to 
empowerment or are they able to take up gender agenda forward in these local bodies etc. 
need detailed analysis. The present study will try to answer this question and will analyses 
25  
  various factors that affecting the participation of women in politics/ Local Self 
Government Institutions.   
Future work  
     The outcome of the study will be useful to policy makers, social scientists, social activists, 
administrators etc. to design and make necessary changes in the policy making and 
address the development deficit because of meagre  or ineffective participation. This also 
will help to address the question of empowerment from the perspective of socially 
deprived tribal women.  It also will bring out role of information technology, awareness 
generation etc in enhancing women’s participation, the importance of financial 
devolution, enabling legal frame works and institutional structures, capacity building etc. 
which are important  to promote women’s participation and empowerment.   
 Tentative Chapters  
    The proposed frame of chapters is:    
1. Introduction   
2. Review of the present literature  
3. Research Area and research methodology   
4. Socio Economic profile of the respondents   
5. Interpretation and Data Analysis  
6. Democratic decentralization, political participation, and Empowerment of Women.  
7. Conclusion and Suggestion  
8. Bibliography - Appendix . 
9. Interview Schedule . 
10. Map. 
11. Photographs   
26  
   
 
Refe rences  
Tyagi Amarendra “Dalit and Tribal Leadership in Panchayats” Mohit Publication, New Delhi 2012 
Baviskar  BS & Mathew George ed.  “Inclusion and exclusion in Local Governance” Sage Publication, 
New Delhi 2009  
Meenakshi J ed. “Women and Panchayati Raj” Omega Publication, New Delhi 2012  
Vidyarthi LP & Rai BK “The Tribal Culture of India” Concept Publications New Delhi 1976  
Bakshi P.M “The Constitution of India” Universal Law Publications, New Delhi, 2002  
Hasan Zoya & Menon Ritu ed. “In a Minority Essays on Muslim Women In India” Oxford Publications, 
New Delhi, 2005  
Mathew Abraham “Role of Panchayats in Welf are Administration” Kalpaz Publications, New Delhi, 
2005  
Kathyayan Rashmi “Jharkhand Panchayati Raj Handbook” Prabhat Prakashan New Delhi 2013  
Singh M K “Panchayati Raj System In India: Issues and Challenges” Centrum Press New Delhi 2014 
Palanithurai G e d. “Dynamics of New Panchayati Raj System in India, Vol IV Empowering Women” 
Concept Publishing H, New Delhi 2005  
Mathew George ed. “Status of Panchayati Raj in the States and Union Territories of India 2013” Concept 
Publishing New Delhi 2013  
Oraon Chand ra Prakash “Land and people Of Jharkhand “JTWRI Publication Ranchi 1961  
Singh Sunil Kumar “Inside Jharkhand” Crown Publications Ranchi 2012  
Srivatsa P “Political Empowerment of Women and Panchayati Raj” Yojana October 2016  
Rajunayak V & Sunitha B “Limit s of the modern Political System: The Case of an Erukula Surpanch in 
Telengana” EPW 4Sept 2021  
Sinha Shrishti “ Political empowerment of women through restructured Panchayati Raj institutions” 
http:// blog.ipleader.in, Aug 2021   
Jephy Medonna  “Women Empowerment through Panchayati Raj system” Law time Journal, Feb 2022  
27  
  EPW Engage “Where are the women in Indian Politics” 2019  
Seth Sachi “PRI Elections in Jharkhand: Making Women Count” News Reach, March -April 2016  
Siddique P Aboobacker “Democratic Decentralization and Empowerment of Women in India” 
Dissertation submitted to JNU, CSSS, JNU New Delhi 2002.  
Raghunandan  T R ed “Decentralisation  and Local Governments the Indian         experience” Essays from 
Economic a nd Political Weekly. Orient Blackswan Private Ltd, Hydrabad, 2012.  
                                                      ******  ****** *******  
